There's a tape that's supposed to ring on this
thing and tell us when we're out of time, but the
truth of the matter is the damn thing doesn't do it.
And so I got to be careful because I don't want to
lose anything.
I like, you know, the first series of questions
really have to do with how did you develop an
interest in oceanography? All right. That is
undergraduate and graduate. In general here, you
are going to be asking me questions, and then I...
I'm going to be asking you questions and letting
you answer them, and sometimes I'm going to let you
wandering off all the way. That's what I was really
wondering about. So basically, you start off
asking me questions, and you hope there's a fair
amount of wonder. Yeah, right. All right. What was
your early training in? You were trained as a
physicist, right? I was trained as a physicist.
And how did you develop your interest in physics?
Well, I guess I was just interested in things,
fooled around with automobiles and motorcycles a
little bit. And the telephone company did a lot of
us a great favor by having a junk pile that we were
free to use and exploit.
Uh, high school, I was, I was brought up in, uh, born
and brought up in Garrettsville, Ohio, a little
south of Cleveland. Uh, very fortunate in having a
very pleasant, instructive family, exceedingly
good teachers in school. In, uh, college, I went to
Hiram College, which was, uh, four miles away
during depression lived at home
did a worked for basically for many years and
summers and spare time etc on for a fellow who ran a
local greenhouse
and who also he and another fellow did contracting
so I got kind of a wide experience of utilizing your
hands and doing an extremely large variety of
peon-like jobs, which was probably very good for
me. Hiram College was small, with a population of
about 400 when I was there.
Most people knew nearly everybody else.
a building about the size of this present building
we're in, the Oceanographic Institution's first
building. It housed all of the science
departments, and we were very fortunate that we
had exceedingly good one-man departments. From
the time you were a sophomore on, if you were
serious about your business, you were treated
like a graduate student. The sophomores taught
laboratories for the freshmen, juniors taught
laboratories for the Southmores and the seniors
taught laboratories for the juniors. And I also
had a WPA job to build instrumentation for
exhibits and lectures and things like this.
The graduates for When I was considering graduate
school, I didn't really see how I could swing it. As
the professor said, my grades were good enough in
some of my sciences. And my grades in some of the
other things were a little too abominable to make
the grade in the Depression when the competition
was so tough.
Happily for me, a classmate of mine who had a
graduate assistantship at Lehigh University. At
the very last moment, he got an opportunity to go to
a better job, and he suggested me, and so in about
the last week of summer, I got an opportunity to go
to Lehigh University in Pennsylvania.
This was... There I had the very good fortune to,
arriving a couple of days early to get my feet on the
ground, I was put in an office with Morris Ewing,
who was assistant professor there at that time. He
was busily at work on geophysical work, preparing
a crystal clock for gravity at sea measurements in
submarines. And after about two minutes of
pleasantry, he put me to work in a profession. And
he turned out to be a pretty good slave driver for
pretty much not only the next four years, but much
of the next decade. I didn't know he'd ever been at
Lehigh. Yes. What did he teach at Lehigh? Well, he
taught mostly sophomore physics. And then he
taught geophysics. He
did a wide variety of really small things in
working with some of the mining people, Bethlehem
Steel, in geophysics, some electrical work, some
work sound vibrations in the ice, things like
this. And he attracted the attention in about 35,
something like this, or 34, of
Dr. Richard Field, who was a professor of geology
at Princeton and is certainly one of the great
heroes of of modern geology and certainly plate
tectonics, because he and William Bowie from the
Coaster Bay were leaders in the feeling that
somehow or other geology was getting on a plateau,
and classical geologists working on land-borne
geology. we're sort of reaching a law diminishing
returns, and because most of the Earth's surface
was water, we knew so little about the geology at
sea that it was probable that the next big steps
would be in the sea. So as I sometimes put it, that
although Dick Field was considered to be a funny
person by by many even before he had his automobile
accident and certainly very funny after that he
was a true fundamentalist and he had the vision to
both see and to encourage some few young
whippersnapper professors like Harry Hess at
Princeton and Morris Ewing at Lehigh that the real
future of geology lay in the sea and If they looked
in that direction, he would back them to the hilt
with everything that he could, and they might make
a reputation for themselves. It certainly turned
out to be true. At the time I arrived, he and
Dr. Bowie from the Coast Guard had been very
effective in getting US submarines follow the
path of the Dutch submarine Navy when they
supported venting Midas and making gravity
measurements at sea.
The field had talked the Bell Telephone
Laboratories into making the first of the crystal
clocks. Incidentally, is this a crystal clock?
Watch. Don't know.
Well. It doesn't make any noise. What it is is a 695
Timex. That's
my bad ear. But in this day and age of crystal
watches that run for a year on your wrist, it is
interesting to think about this clock, which was
produced in about 1935. It was the first of the
portable crystals. It had 180 volts of lead acid B
batteries and was about half a relay rack. This
turned out to be, for over a decade, one of the great
timepieces of geophysics because it could be
moved around at sea and in submarines.
My first job was in sort of looking at the system was
I thought perhaps
Well, excuse me. One of the difficulties they had
was the whirling wheel, the rotor of the machine,
was viewed by a little crude stroboscope, which
was triggered by WWV signals over the radio. And
presumably, if there wasn't any static, every
second you would get a pop and you could read the
thing very carefully, about a thousandth of a
second. When the static was going strong, it
popped so often that it was hard to see anything but
a blur. And having been interested in photography
and taking advantage of the nonlinear
characteristics of some of the curves having to do
with illumination and film density, we built up a
little integrating system and took pictures of
it.
So that was how I got in. how I got in oceanography.
The work at Lehigh was primarily the normal
geophysical graduate work with the addition of
about
six, administering about six laboratories a week
for sophomores, which was probably good for the
but it took up a lot of time. It was a tremendous
amount of extracurricular time spent on working
on equipment.
This was, I suppose in one respect, I made the
mistake of getting so interested in research that
I didn't do very well with my classwork, which I'm
not sure in retrospect whether this was good or
bad, but it's the way it was.
The principal thing we worked on at Lehigh that I
worked on with Ewing was the geophysical
measurement of trying to see how deep the
sediments were. It was basically how much mud is
there on the bottom of the ocean. And it turned out,
years later, we found out there was surprisingly
little mud.
That was one of the important, turned out to be one
of the important clues on plate tectonics, that
why weren't there more sediments in the ocean, and
particularly near the center of the ocean. But
anyhow, back at that time, it was trying to get some
apparatus going.
We both practiced and tried to get data by doing
seismic work along the continental shelf from the
outcrops in the Appalachians out to the edge of the
ocean. A strong coworker there was John Lamar
Warzel, who was an undergraduate at the same time I
was a graduate student. He was one of several very
smart, very hardworking, very cantankerous
students that ended up with versatility and
toughness to keep going at the system.
We built nearly all of our own apparatus in deep
water work.
Excuse me, I want to go back to the work on land. For
about A year and a half, or over about a two-year
period, we intermittently did this shore work
with about five lines of stations from the
outcrops down to the beach, mostly across the
state of New Jersey, although some in New England.
One had to learn a certain amount of politics
because you tended to drill your shot holes at the
edge of the highway. So if the highwayman came
along, you said you thought you were on the man's
property. And if a farmer came along, you said you
thought you were on the highway. And then after the
dynamite blew up, why, then you folded your tent
and left as quickly as you could. But there was a
great deal of work with explosives at that time.
and this was transformed soon into work at sea. But
in this work on land, one interesting aspect of it
was we'd go out for extremely long weekends, and on
Sunday night when we came back, we would, when
possible, try and stop off at Princeton and see
Richard Field, who was interested in how things
were going.
I want to emphasize again what a What a great
influence he had, certainly on people like Morris
Ewing and also on junior people such as myself.
Along about 1937, Ewing
got a grant from the Geological Society of America
to do deepwater geophysical work at sea. This work
was going to be done in cooperation with the Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution and their ship
Atlantis.
For the next three years, we had about 10 days or two
weeks, the tail end of each summer, to utilize the
ship in conjunction with other people to test out
our apparatus and get some measurements.
I will outline the approach a little bit because I
think that is an important part, has played an
important part in certainly the way I've looked at
oceanography and equipment.
The first way was to copy pretty much what they were
doing at sea. We got a piece of an old cannon barrel
for an instrument case. We had a string of four
geophones and three bombs We built all the
apparatus that went into them, including the
geophones. I took them to sea and used them for two
summers. Amongst other things,
the first year we did not know whether explosives
would go off on the bottom of the ocean. DuPont had
suggested they might not, so we built pressure
cases for them. The second year, we tried TNT and
making TNT, we took granulated TNT, sent it down to
the bottom in rubber bags so it would compress,
then we drilled a hole in it for the blasting caps,
and the next day we would put our blasting caps in it
and put it back and tighten up the rubber balloons
and use our TNT exposed to full sea pressure. It
seemed to function all right. However, the
general problem of laying out a piece of apparatus
nearly a mile long, half a mile long on the bottom of
the ocean, And keeping it oriented and then
keeping this sensitive apparatus so that it
wasn't jerked on by this half-inch steel cable
that supported it all was a little much, and we knew
it.
I think one of the more interesting days of my life
was one Sunday night after reading the New York
Times about... Jacques, about Auguste Picard's
bathyscaphe, where they used gasoline to float
the bathyscaphe up and down, we came to the
conclusion that perhaps this was the way to lower
our apparatus to the bottom. And in fact, we wrote
up a paper on this and proposed this as deep sea
instruments without wires or cables.
One Sunday night, we thought about this very
seriously, in fact, so seriously that we decided
to junk a two-year-old program that had a
fantastic amount of work already into it on the
grounds that it just couldn't stand up to a free
instrument system. So we started building
apparatus
where each recorder, each bomb was completely
separate with its own time clock, which was
furnished by the Hamlin Watch Company.
Several points about this kind of work, which I
believe were important to the future of
individuals involved in oceanography. One, it
was starting at the bottom of the ocean. I'd been in
oceanography for three years before I had much of
anything to do with any equipment or ideas and so
forth, which were meant to be used at water depths
shallower than two miles. And as a result, you got
thinking of the bottom of the ocean with the
standard depth, and all other depths were less
than standard.
drove one rather early to think much more about
pressurized, about pressure vessels and also
techniques in which you do not need to put things in
pressure vessels. When we first needed batteries
to run the light through a deep sea camera,
just the thought of putting ordinary dry cell
batteries into a container bothered us both from
the standpoint of cost and also from the
standpoint of weight. So we couldn't see any
reason why chemically a storage battery
shouldn't work as well exposed to sea pressure as
not. By this time, we had a 14-inch shell, which
we'd gotten from the Army and installed.
And this could be operated at pressures up to
12,000 to 15,000 PSI, or about 10,000 PSI, which we
did. Nearly all that work was done at night because
it was so close to the breaking point of the shell.
And it was installed just below the office of the
chairman of the department. And we thought if
there was going to be an accident, it better be at
night.
It turned out, of course, that not only was the
storage battery happy working at pressure, but it
actually seemed to, if anything, prefer the
temperatures and pressures at the bottom of the
ocean over being jostled around in your
automobile. This technique was in one way or
another, was used in a variety of other ways. I
think the important thing here is that we, very
early on,
we maintained respect, but we lost any particular
fear for pressures in the bottom of the ocean.
Because as Percy Bridgman said in his book on high
pressures, that his book was not about pressures
like 10,000 psi. His book was about high
pressures. And this is important because
altogether too many people still do think of the
pressures in the bottom of the ocean as being high
when actually they're low compared to the
strength of a wide range of commonly used
materials. And I think the important thing about
the bottom of the ocean is be careful but be
optimistic.
The... Seismic at sea work was continued rather
falteringly. A tremendous amount of effort went
into building the apparatus, and it didn't get
very much usage, but it got a few numbers during the
next four years.
Lately, Ted Bullard, in describing some of this
work, said that he was amazed that Ewing was
willing to draw so many conclusions from so little
data. But he realized that A, that was all the data
we had, and B, that was Ewing.
Incidentally, Ted Bullard did come over and go out
to see on some of the measurements. Another
important part in this era was the development of
underwater cameras, which we did a little bit.
First was done up in the Gulf of Maine with a camera
we put together over a weekend because it seemed so
ridiculous to go to sea and not take pictures. We
bought a $12 Argus, a used a pressure case that was
made out of a test tube we had that was three feet
long and about six inches in diameter. And while
this was able to float by itself,
we fastened a piece of string or what the fishermen
called cod line to it so we could operate it at night
and not lose it. When you don't have much money, you
have to be much more fundamental.
So that we didn't lose this thing, we had a ground
rule that no one on the camera could wear any gloves
because the string wasn't terribly strong, but it
was very fine, and you would cut your hands before
you could break the string. This camera... It was
very successful. And during the several months we
had it, it took a great many pictures and was
really, I think, the forerunner of cameras that
were to be used at deeper than diver depths. And it
showed that it was really nothing very difficult
about it. And as we emphasized in the paper, Ewing
and Warzel and I wrote. It was not a question of
optics. It was a question of mechanics, of
arranging your equipment so that there would be
something in front of the camera when you took the
picture, and then also in not violating the simple
elementary rules of backlighting and so forth.
The National Geographic then sponsored us for
more comprehensive photographic program which
we made a camera to operate on the bottom of the
ocean out to depths of three miles. This camera was
one of the first pieces of equipment we lowered
without any wires or cables. And if I might just
tell a sea story There, many years later, I was
honored by the Compass Award of the Marine
Technology Society. And when given the award,
normally one says as little as possible, but I made
a comment that when the man was outlining all of the
splendid things I was supposed to have done, that
all I could think of was when we took our deep sea
camera out for the first time. And in that clear,
azure water off Bermuda, we lowered it over the
side and cast it free. And when it was about 10 feet
underwater, I remembered I had left the lens cap
on. And nothing could have been further from your
mind that you would ever be given any kind of an
award for anything other than nautical
ignorance.